So far in this Python tutorial, we've been writing out all the code that we need directly into these
code cells.
Now that's fine when you only have a little bit of code that needs to be run, but it happens very often
that there are particular pieces of code or chunks of code that you need to run multiple times.
You want to implement some kind of calculation or maybe a complicated set of calculations many, many
times.
And for that, it's convenient to package up all of the lines of code that you need so that you can
call them once, repeatedly, without having to rewrite the code over and over and over again.
And that is the idea of a function.
So a function in Python or in coding languages in general, is a set of code lines that you keep sometimes
in a separate code cell or sometimes in a separate file.
And then you can repeatedly call those sets of code lines multiple times.
Okay, now you've already seen several functions in the past couple of videos.
For example, we've been using the function print an awful lot.
There's a couple of other common functions like Len for length.
You've seen type to extract the type of variable of a particular variable that we create.
Here's another one that I'm going to introduce you to this type.
Or this function is called sum.
And can you guess what it does.
It sums up a set of numbers.
So for example if I type sum and then here I'm entering a list.
You can tell that this is a list by the square brackets.
So notice let me zoom in to ludicrous proportions here.
Here I have parentheses and I have square brackets.
So the parentheses are indicating a function.
And inside the function I'll put some spaces here and make it even more visible inside the function.
I'm providing a list and this is a list because it has square brackets.
Okay, so this is called the input into the function.
Get back to human size zoom scale here.
So this is an input into the function.
Functions take inputs and they provide outputs.
In this case I'm giving one function input.
And now I'm going to run this code cell.
And the answer is 60.
Or the message that prints out is 60.
And what is this number here.
And what does that correspond to.
Well I'm sure you've figured it out.
That is the sum of these three numbers.
So ten plus 20 plus 30 equals 60.
So I can add another number here.
Let's say one.
So there you go.
Now I have 61.
And we can also input variables into a function.
So here I'm going to write a list.
And this is my list.
And now the input into this sum function is a list okay.
And now, uh, functions can only most functions take very specific types of inputs.
So for example, the function sum only makes sense if we are inputting numbers.
So if I would start inputting a string like this.
Hi.
Now this is completely fine.
There's nothing wrong with this list.
But if I try to sum then we get an error message and the error message is unsupported.
Operand types for plus int and string.
So what does this mean?
Well, an operand is a symbol that's used to indicate a particular operation.
And in this case the operand is plus sign.
So we are trying to add together.
Now you have seen in several videos ago that the plus sign is overloaded in Python, meaning that three
plus three is six.
But let's say Mike plus I'll do the space.
Coen.
This is going to give one, uh, result, one string of my code.
So it's concatenating these.
Okay.
So the question is, you know, what do we do when we have a situation like this?
What is Python supposed to do?
This is not the same thing as the string theory.
That works fine.
Here we get Mike Cohen three.
But if this is the number three.
Now Python doesn't know what to do with this because we are trying to use the same operator in very
different ways on very different types of variables.
Okay.
And that is the problem here.
So we get this error message here okay.
So that is a bit about uh functions and inputs.
Functions can also provide outputs.
So let's say I'll just call this the output put put let's say output like this.
Now when I run this code again I don't get any errors, I don't get any warning messages.
But I no longer see the output of this cell.
So where did that go?
Well, it's still there.
It's just assigned to this variable output.
So you will see the output of a code cell after the cell only when it's the final line of the cell,
only for the final line of the cell.
And if it does not involve variable assignment.
So this final line of code in this cell actually does create a variable.
It assigns a variable.
So therefore the output into the notebook is suppressed.
Those are the rules.
I don't know why Python developers do that, but that's just how it works.
If we want to see what is the value of output, then we can type it in here like this.
So now this is the final piece of code, the final line of code in this code cell.
And there's no assignment involved.
It's just that variable here.
So we can do this.
And of course you know we can also use the print function.
Okay.
So now you have seen that functions can take inputs and functions can provide outputs.
Some functions take multiple inputs.
Some functions provide multiple outputs.
Some functions don't provide any outputs or don't take any inputs.
It's really dependent on the nature of the function and what the function is calculating.
Okay.
And now let's see.
So we have the sum of all of these numbers.
And we also know how to calculate the length of these numbers or this list here.
So there's four elements in this list.
And that I get from this function Len for length.
Now what if we wanted to compute the average or the mean of these numbers.
Well the algorithm to calculate the average of a set of numbers is you sum up all the numbers and then
you divide by the number of numbers.
So let's create another variable here I will call this variable list count.
How about that.
So list count.
And now we can calculate the average of the list by dividing the output.
And actually this is a terrible variable name.
I'm going to call this a sum of list okay.
And then I will just delete this here.
By the way you see an example of using Snakecase over here.
And this is camel case.
As I mentioned before, you will find angry people on the internet who like to say that you should only
do one or the other, and you should be consistent.
My personal opinion is as long as your variable names are clear and readable and meaningful, I really
don't think it's a big deal what flavor of casing you use.
Okay, so here I have a variable sum of list.
And here is list count.
And now to calculate the average let's do this average of numbers I'm going to say sum of list divided
by list count.
And let's see what the average of numbers is.
Ah this is very interesting.
I actually did not do this on purpose, but this is a great learning opportunity.
Here we get an error message and the error message is list count is not defined.
Now when you first see this error message you might be confused because hey you know what's the deal
here?
Python I actually did define list count, but you'll remember that variable names are case sensitive.
So here this is just a little typo.
I didn't capitalize the C over here.
So list count lowercase c is a completely completely different beast from list count uppercase C.
So the average of this set of numbers this list of numbers is 15.25 okay.
Now why do we have to write out this entire algorithm?
Maybe Python has a function for the average and we can write average a list.
Okay, so that doesn't work.
Uh, maybe it's mean.
Uh huh.
That also doesn't work.
Okay, so this means that if we are just working in base Python, any time we want to calculate the
average of a set of numbers, we need to write out the entire algorithm all by ourselves.
Now, in this toy example, that's not such a big deal, right?
The algorithm for calculating the average is not so long.
Who cares?
We can do this.
That's fine for this case, but there are other algorithms that you will want to implement that end
up being tens of lines of code or hundreds of lines of code long.
And so you will.
So it becomes really tedious to have to write out all that code.
And that's why we have functions that are stored in dedicated libraries like NumPy, matplotlib, PyTorch,
SciPy, SciPy, pandas.
There's tons and tons of libraries in Python that are frequently used.
Okay, but that is the segue to the next video on libraries.